OFFICE

#10 Install an instant water heater near your kitchen sink so you don t have to run the water while it heats up. This also reduces energy costs.
#29 Upgrade older toilets with water-saving WaterSense® labeled models.
#39 Install water-saving aerators on all of your faucets.
#41 Look for WaterSense® labeled toilets, sink faucets, urinals and showerheads.
#54 Hire a GreenPlumber® to help reduce your water, energy, and chemical use.
#143 Some commercial refrigerators and ice-makers are cooled with water. Upgrade to air-cooled appliances for significant water savings.
#144 Post a hotline in bathrooms and kitchens to report leaks or water waste to facility managers or maintenance personnel.
#145 Create a suggestion and incentives system at your organization to recognize water-saving ideas.
#146 Include a water-saving tip in your employee newsletter. Find 100+ tips at wateruseitwisely.com.
#147 Implement a water management plan for your facility, then educate employees on good water habits through newsletters and posters.
#148 Publish your organization s monthly water use to show progress toward water-saving goals.
#149 Invite your water utility conservation staff to your organization for Earth Day and other environmental events to help promote water savings.
#150 Water audit your facility to find out your recommended water use, then monitor your utility bills to gauge your monthly consumption.
#151 Have maintenance personnel regularly check your facilities for leaks, drips and other water waste.
#152 If you use processed water in your business or facility, look into water recycling.
#153 Contact your water utility to see if rebates are available for purchasing water-efficient fixtures, equipment or for facility audits.
#154 Consider and compare water use when purchasing ice makers, dishwashers, reverse osmosis units, coolers and cleaning equipment.
#155 Become or appoint a water ambassador within your organization who creates, implements and maintains your water conservation program.
#156 Become a proud WaterSense® partner and let all your customers know.
#157 As part of the WaterSense® Fix-A-Leak Week in March, plan an employee campaign to look for leaks.
#158 Determine how your on-site water is being used by installing sub-meters where feasible, then monitoring for savings.
#159 Conduct a facility water use inventory and identify water management goals.
#160 Don t forget hidden water use costs, like energy for pumping, heating and cooling, chemical treatment, and damage and sewer expenses.
#161 Show your company s dedication to water conservation through a policy statement. Commit management, staff and resources to the effort.
#162 Shut off water to unused areas of your facility to eliminate waste from leaks or unmonitored use.
#163 Create a goal of how much water your company can save and plan a celebration once that goal is met.
#164 Ask employees for suggestions on saving water and give prizes for the best ideas. Incentivize it!
#165 Write feature articles on your employee website that highlight water-saving ideas and successes.
#166 Test your co-workers or employees on topics like xeriscape, WaterSense®, and high-efficiency toilets. See how water-wise they are.
#167 Hire a WaterSense® irrigation partner to help with your landscape.
#168 Saving water on your landscape adds up quickly. Send the person in charge of your landscape to an irrigation workshop.
#169 Marry the weather with your landscape water use. Water use should decrease during rainy periods and increase during hot, dry periods.
#170 Visit your local Water Conservation office s website to get information on programs available to businesses.
#171 Make sure your contract plumber and/or maintenance personnel knows about GreenPlumbers®.
#172 Ask your company to support water conservation events and education. ProjectWet hosts local events throughout the country.
#173 Support Tap Into Quality and forgo those plastic water bottles to lower your carbon footprint.
#174 Scrape dishes rather than rinsing them before washing.
#175 Use water-conserving icemakers.
#176 A recent study showed that 99% of business managers surveyed ranked water conservation as a  top five  priority over the next decade.
#177 If your facility relies on cooling towers, have maintenance maximize cycles of concentration by providing efficient water treatment.
#178 Be sure your irrigation system is watering only the areas intended, with no water running onto walks, streets or down the gutter.
#179 While cleaning sidewalks, a hose and nozzle use 8-12 gallons of water per minute. A pressurized Waterbroom® uses closer to 3 gallons.
#180 Inspect your landscape irrigation system regularly for leaks or broken sprinkler heads and adjust pressures to specification.
#181 Give your landscape proper amounts of irrigation water. Determine water needs, water deeply but infrequently, and adjust to the season.
#182 Establish a monthly water budget for your landscape based on the water needs of your plants.
#183 Limit turf areas at your facility. Instead, landscape using xeriscape principles to cut water use in half.
#184 Put decorative fountains on timers and use only during work or daylight hours. Check for leaks if you have automatic refilling devices.
#185 Wash company vehicles at commercial car washers that recycle water.
#186 Wash company vehicles as needed rather than on a schedule. Stretch out the time in between washes.
#187 Consider turning your high-maintenance water feature/fountain into a low-maintenance art feature or planter.
#188 When buying new appliances, consider those that offer cycle and load size adjustments. They are more water and energy efficient.
#189 Support projects that use reclaimed wastewater for irrigation and industrial uses.
#190 When ice cubes are leftover from your drink, don t throw them out. Pour them on a plant.