XERISCAPE LANDSCAPING
#62 Use porous material for walkways and patios to prevent wasteful runoff and keep water in your yard.
#63 Group plants with the same watering needs together to avoid overwatering some while underwatering others.
#64 Choose the right Arizona-friendly plants and watch them thrive in our desert environment.
#65 Reduce the amount of lawn in your yard by planting shrubs and ground covers appropriate to your site and region.
#66 Plant species native to your region.
#67 Plant in the spring and fall, when the watering requirements are lower.
#68 When sprucing up your front or backyard, consider xeriscaping. This landscape method uses low-water-use plants to limit your water use.
#69 Consider attending a landscape class hosted by a water provider. Most workshops occur in the spring and fall.
#70 Avoid planting grass in areas that are hard to water, such as steep inclines and isolated strips along sidewalks and driveways.
#71 Leave lower branches on trees and shrubs and allow leaf litter to accumulate on the soil. This keeps the soil cooler and reduces evaporation.
#72 Start a compost pile. Using compost in your garden or flower beds adds water-holding organic matter to the soil.
#73 Use a layer of organic mulch on the surface of your planting beds to minimize weed growth that competes for water.
#74 Spreading a layer of organic mulch around plants helps them retain moisture, saving water, time and money.
#75 Use 2 to 4 inches of organic mulch around plants to reduce evaporation and save hundreds of gallons of water a year.
#76 Visit your local xeriscape garden to view plants that thrive in our hot desert environment.
#77 Next time you add or replace a flower or shrub, choose a low-water-use plant and save up to 550 gallons each year.
#78 Call your local conservation office for more information about xeriscaping with water-thrifty trees, plants, and ground covers.
#79 Collect water from your roof by installing gutters and downspouts. Direct the runoff to plants and trees.
#80 For automatic water savings, direct water from rain gutters and HVAC systems to water-loving plants in your landscape.
LAWN CARE
#81 Hire a qualified pro to install your irrigation system and keep it working properly and efficiently.
#82 Hire a Smartscape Certified professional landscaper who has received landscape training specific to the Sonoran Desert.
#83 Adjust your lawn mower to the height of 1.5 to 2 inches. Taller grass shades roots and holds soil moisture better than short grass.
#84 Leave lawn clippings on your grass, this cools the ground and holds in moisture.
#85 If installing a lawn, select a lawn mix or blend that matches your climate and site conditions.
#86 Aerate your lawn periodically. Holes every six inches will allow water to reach the roots, rather than run off the surface.
#87 If walking across the lawn leaves footprints (blades don’t spring back up), then it is time to water.
#88 Let your lawn go dormant (brown) during the winter. Dormant grass only needs to be watered every three to four weeks, less if it rains.
#89 Avoid overseeding your lawn with winter grass. Ryegrass needs water every few days, whereas Dormant Bermuda grass needs water monthly.
#90 Remember to weed your lawn and garden regularly. Weeds compete with other plants for nutrients, light and water.
#91 While fertilizers promote plant growth, they also increase water consumption. Apply the minimum amount of fertilizer needed.
#92 Water your summer lawns once every three days and your winter lawn once every five days.
#93 Catch water in an empty tuna can to measure sprinkler output. 3/4 to 1 inch of water is enough to apply each time you irrigate.
LANDSCAPE
#94 Read the Landscape Watering by the Numbers guidebook to help you determine how long and how much to water.
#95 Use a trowel, shovel, or soil probe to examine soil moisture depth. If the top two to three inches of soil are dry, it’s time to water.
#96 Set a kitchen timer when using the hose as a reminder to turn it off. A running hose can discharge up to 10 gallons per minute.
#97 Check your sprinkler system frequently and adjust sprinklers so only your lawn is watered and not the house, sidewalk or street.
#98 Minimize evaporation by watering during the early morning hours when temperatures are cooler and winds are lighter.
#99 Timing is everything when it comes to irrigation. Learn how to set your controller properly.
#100 Look for WaterSense® labeled irrigation controllers.
#101 Learn how to shut off your automatic watering system in case of malfunctions or rain.
#102 Apply water only as fast as the soil can absorb it.
#103 If water runs off your lawn easily, split your watering time into shorter periods to allow for better absorption.
#104 Water only when necessary. More plants die from over-watering than from under-watering.
#105 Signs of overwatering: Leaves turn lighter shades of green or yellow, young shoots wilt, and sometimes algae or fungi grow.
#106 Adjust your watering schedule each month to match seasonal weather conditions and landscape requirements.
#107 Install a rain sensor on your irrigation controller so your system won’t run when it’s raining.
#108 Water dry spot by hand instead of running the whole irrigation system longer.
#109 Don’t water your lawn on windy days when most of the water blows away or evaporates.
#110 Use drip irrigation for shrubs and trees to apply water directly to the roots, where it’s needed.
#111 Water your plants deeply but less frequently to encourage deep root growth and drought tolerance.
#112 Use sprinklers that deliver big drops of water close to the ground. Smaller drops and mist often evaporate before hitting the ground.
#113 Use a rain barrel to harvest rainwater from gutters for watering gardens and landscapes.
#114 For hanging baskets, planters and pots, put ice cubes on top of the soil to give your plants a cool drink of water without overflow.
#115 Remember to periodically check your sprinkler system valves for leaks, and to keep sprinkler heads in good shape.
#116 Spring is a great time to give your irrigation system a checkup to ensure it’s working efficiently.
#117 Pruning properly can help your plants use water more efficiently.
POOL
#118 Use a pool cover to help keep your pool clean, reduce chemical use and prevent water loss through evaporation.
#119 Make sure your swimming pools, fountains and ponds are equipped with recirculating pumps.
#120 If you have an automatic refilling device, check your pool periodically for leaks.
#121 When back-washing your pool, consider using the water on salt-tolerant plants in the landscape.
#122 Minimize or eliminate the use of waterfalls and sprays in your pool. Aeration increases evaporation.
#123 Don’t overfill the pool. Lower water levels will reduce water loss due to splashing.
#124 Keep water in the pool when playing, it will save water.
#125 Instead of building a private pool, join a community pool.
#126 Trickling or cascading fountains lose less water to evaporation than those that spray water into the air.
#127 Use a grease pencil to conduct a bucket test to check for pool leaks. An unnatural water level drop may indicate a leak.
GENERAL OUTDOOR
#128 Winterize outdoor spigots when temperatures dip below freezing to prevent pipes from leaking or bursting.
#129 For more immediate hot water and energy savings, insulate hot water pipes.
#130 Use a commercial car wash that recycles water. Or, wash your car on the lawn, and you’ll water your grass at the same time.
#131 Use a hose nozzle or turn off the water while you wash your car. You’ll save up to 100 gallons every time.
#132 Wash your pets outdoors, in an area of your lawn that needs water.
#133 When cleaning out fish tanks, give the nutrient-rich water to your non-edible plants.
#134 When you give your pet fresh water, don’t throw the old water down the drain. Use it to water your trees or shrubs.
#135 Use a broom instead of a hose to clean patios, sidewalks and driveways, and save water every time.
#136 Evaporative coolers require a seasonal maintenance check. For more efficient cooling, check your evaporative cooler annually.
#137 If you have an evaporative cooler, direct the water drain to plants in your landscape.
#138 Set water softeners for a minimum number of refills to save both water and chemicals, plus energy, too.
#139 If you have an evaporative cooler, install a recirculating pump to keep water from bleeding off with one pass.
#140 Report broken pipes, leaky hydrants and errant sprinklers to property owners or your local water provider.
#141 Know where your master water shut-off valve is located. Were a pipe to burst, this could save gallons of water and prevent damage.
#142 Install a thermostat and timer on your evaporative cooler so it only operates when necessary.
